# UI Toolkit in VR

## Overview

### Intro

This site is looking into implemnenting UI Toolkit andthe latest Unity UI Workflows in a VR Application based off the Meta XR SDK.

The main challenge will be transitioning all possible visual elements from UGUI to UITK while keeping the Meta Poke Interactables for the tactile VR Experience.

From what I have seen Avatar Academy right now uses UGUI layered on top of a 3D Tablet Model with the poke interactables on top of the UGUI with an audio filter at the bottom.

Aiming to work with the Meta Quest 2 as a baseline for performance. If you're brand new to UI Toolkit, to official Unity E-Book is the best resource to get started with.

### Goals

The goal will be to replace the 3D and UGUI Layer with a single UITK Panel, then have the XR Interactables layered on top. The UI Panels should be able to be generated through code by Immersives, but have their design easily modifiable by creatives who can tweak values themselves, or pass it onto an immersive who can easily do it in 5 minutes.

One of the main ideas I have had is taking advantage of a "style sheet"" scriptable object class which can set the USS Style Sheet variables to quickly change the look of the project. This would also allow us to set different presets so users could customize the application however they wish. Or we could even make it fully customisable to the user who can select primary, secondary colours, font, background style etc. 

Features like this are the main benefit to switching from UGUI to code generated UI.

### Challenges

UITK in VR is pretty much brand new since it only became available a couple months ago so we would be among the first to develop something at a decent scale through it from what I can tell. This is a challenge since we don't have many online resources. 

Unity however are really pushing it recently with a full YouTube series being launched and updated regularly as of writing this 2nd February 2026. Will be important to document progress and share knowledge as integrations goes along so everyone isn't discovering things for the first time.

---

## Design Patterns

### Factories

You can code the UXML Documents for specific static panels that won't change at run time. This is just like making a html page. For generating in C# it is best to use factories for visual element creation. All of the UXML Elements can be made through C# but it is alot of boilerplate so you can just ask AI to generate them for you and they will work perfectly. It's then easy to modify each of the functions and add variations for specific styles where needed. I use Claude Sonnet 4.5 on the free tier which is pretty good.

### Constants and References

The main downside to UITK right now is that it is ran on strings so a constants class is crucial for passing through styles in C#. I just make a UIToolkitStyles class to store them all in for type-safety. It is also good to cache the visual elements on creation so you don't need to run string queries to find the element when trying to update at runtime. 

### Builder

It'll also be good to implement the builder pattern to quickly and safely generate the panels in the C# view classes. The main problem I came across myself was all my view classes becoming repetetive long lists of Factory calls and adding to elements so this could be done much more smoothly on a bigger project. Would need to figure out the specifics but it'll still probably be better to create elements that need to be cached directly from the factory then add them, but the builder can easily set the containers, styles, text, images, shaders, etc.

---

## Site Contents

### References

Links to official Unity Documentation and Videos about UI Toolkit and Shader Graph for UI Toolkit.

### Research

Pages on specific elements of the system such as UITK Shader Graph implementation, Integration with VR, and converting modern web styling to USS for use in Unity.

### AI Docs

Docs generated by Claude Sonnet 4.6. Since it is new there is little resources for it to scour, but it is good at giving an overview and general ideas since the workflow is essentially trying to replicate Software UI Programming in Unity.

Good for an initial reference and overview when new to the topic but be careful with it hallucinating stuff due to the workflow still being new. 

---